Rewrite changelog for 0.3.0 release (#410)
extendr/extendr: CHANGELOG.md

# Changelog

## 0.3.0

### Added

- `Function` type that wraps an R function, which can be invoked using the `call()` method [[#188]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/188)
- `pairlist!` macro for generating `Pairlist` objects, e.g. for use in function calls [[#202]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/202)

> - `use_try_from` option for the `extendr` macro, which allows the use of any type that implements `TryInto<Robj>`/`TryFrom<Robj>`, e.g. `#[extendr(use_try_from = true)]` [[#222]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/222)

Reviewer: I though that it should be enabled by default now? I am not even sure `use_try_from` is still used.

Author: Hmm, not sure. I believe it's still in the source code. @andy-thomason?

Author: Also, it's still an open issue here: https://github.com/extendr/extendr/issues/336

Reviewer: I am not sure about the state of this feature. I expect that now it is opt-out (i.e set to `true` by default), but I want to double check before we write it down :)

- Large Rust integer types (`u32`, `u64` and `i64`) can now be converted to R's `numeric` type, which can handle large integer values [[#242]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/242)
- `call!` macro, which can be used to call an R function whose name is provided as a string [[#238]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/238)

> - Implemented `TryFrom<Robj>` for a large number of Rust types [[#249]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/249), [[#258]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/258)

Reviewer: Following the guide you [linked](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/), it seems it should be
```suggestion
- `TryFrom<Robj>` for a large number of Rust types [[#249]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/249), [[#258]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/258)
```
because we have an implicit *Added* from the section title. Right now it reads `"(Added) Implemented TryFrom<Robj>"`

- Support for `ALTREP` [[#250]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/250)
- An `S4` struct, which wraps an S4 class in R [[#268]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/268)

> - Implemented `TryFrom<&ArrayBase> for Robj`, allowing `extendr`-annotated functions to return Arrays from the `ndarray` crate and have them automatically converted to R arrays. Note, even if 1D arrays are returned they will not be returned as vectors. [[#275]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/275)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implemented `TryFrom<&ArrayBase> for Robj`, allowing `extendr`-annotated functions to return Arrays from the `ndarray` crate and have them automatically converted to R arrays. Note: even if 1D arrays are returned they will not be returned as vectors. [[#275]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/275)
```

> - `Rint`, `Rdouble`, `Rbool` and `Rcplx`: `ALTREP` wrapper classes for R vectors, which can be used without copying [[#274]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/274), [[#284]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/284), [[#301]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/301), [[#338]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/338), [[#350]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/350)

Reviewer: Those aren't `ALTREP`, thay are `NA`-aware (zero-cost) wrappers around primitive scalars like `i32`, `f64`, etc.

Author: So they're wrappers around Rust numeric types that can be used in R? Do they get converted to native vectors?

- `Integers`, `Doubles`, `Strings`, `Logicals` and `Complexes`: `ALTREP` wrappers for vectors that allows for much larger vectors than native R [[#274]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/274), [[#284]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/284), [[#301]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/301), [[#338]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/338), [[#350]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/350)
- `ExternalPtr`, a wrapper class for creating R objects containing any Rust object. [[#260]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/260)

> - Support for R graphics and graphics devices. These are locked behind the `graphics` feature flag, which is disabled by default. [[#279]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/279), [[#360]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/360), [[#373]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/373), [[#379]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/379), [[#380]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/380), [[#389]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/389)

Reviewer: What if we can have some visually distinguishable syntax to highlight feature-gated features?
What about
```suggestion
- [**graphics**] Support for R graphics and graphics devices. The `graphics` feature flag is disabled by default. [[#279]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/279), [[#360]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/360), [[#373]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/373), [[#379]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/379), [[#380]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/380), [[#389]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/389)
```

Author: Good idea.

> - Implemented `Deref` for vector types (Rint/Rfloat/Rbool/Rstr/Robj) to appropriately typed Rust slices [[#327]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/327)

Reviewer: It is slightly misleading. We have vector wrappers like `Integers`, and we have scalar types like `Rint`. An item of `Integers` has type of `Rint`. So if I read the PR description correctly, it is basically dereferencing `Integers` into` &[Rint]`, mutable in some cases.

Author: Okay I've now updated my description. Feel free to re-review it.

> - Implemented `Deref` for vector types (Rint/Rfloat/Rbool/Rstr/Robj) to appropriately typed Rust slices [[#327]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/327)

Reviewer: Also, perhaps
```suggestion
- `Deref` implementation for vector types (Rint/Rfloat/Rbool/Rstr/Robj) to appropriately typed Rust slices [[#327]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/327)
```

> - Added a `default` option for `extendr`-annotated functions, allowing them to have default values, e.g. `fn fred(#[default="NULL"] x: Option><i32>) { }` [[#334]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/334)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added a `default` option for `extendr`-annotated functions, allowing them to have default values, e.g. `fn fred(#[default="NULL"] x: Option<i32>) { }` [[#334]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/334)
```

- The `r_name` option for `extendr`-annotated functions, allowing the generated R function to have a different name. e.g.
    ```rust
    #[extendr(
        use_try_from = true,
        r_name = "test.rename.rlike",
        mod_name = "test_rename_mymod"
    )]
    fn test_rename() { }
    ```
    [[#335]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/335)

> - Implemented `serde::Serialize` for R types [[#305]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/305), [[#355]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/355)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `serde::Serialize` implementation for R types [[#305]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/305), [[#355]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/355)
```

- `Rany` type and the `as_any` conversion method. [[#320]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/320)

> - Implemented `std::fmt::Debug` for wrapper types [[#345]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/345)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `std::fmt::Debug` implementation for wrapper types [[#345]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/345)
```

> - Implemented the `[[` operator to function on Rust classes, where it functions the same the `$` operator. [[#359]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/359)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implemented the `[[` operator to work with Rust classes. Its behavior is identical to that of the `$` operator. [[#359]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/359)
```

> - `Load` and `Save`, traits that implement the ability to load and save R data to the RDS format. These traits are implemented for all `Robj` [[#363]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/363)

Reviewer: Not sure I agree with the phrase `"traits that implement"`. Traits by themselves do not implement anything (at least in the majority of cases), they are more like an API contract. So I'd propose 
```suggestion
- `Load` and `Save`, traits that, once implemented, provide the ability to load and save R data in the RDS format. These traits are implemented for all `Robj` [[#363]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/363)
```

- Support for R version 4.2 [[#399]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/399)
- The `Dataframe` wrapper struct [[#393]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/393)
- The `IntoDataFrame` trait, which can be derived to allow arbitrary Rust structs to be converted to rows of a data frame [[#393]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/393)

### Changed

- `Strings::elt` now returns an `Rstr` [[#345]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/345)
- Renamed `RType` to `Rtype`  [[#345]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/345)
- Wrapper types now contain `Robj` fields [[#190]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/190)

> - The `R!` macro now accepts strings that contain R code. This is now the recommended way of using the macro. [[#203]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/203)

Reviewer: Can we have a tiny `R!()` example here?

> - Better error handling for `<&str>::try_from(Robj)` [[#226]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/226)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Improved error handling for `<&str>::try_from(Robj)` [[#226]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/226)
```

- `SymPair::sym_pair()` now returns `(Option<Robj>, Robj)` [[#225]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/225)

> - Better error messages when converting Rust integer types to R [[#243]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/243)

Reviewer: `"Better"` does not really reflect what is being improved. I'd suggest
```suggestion
- More detailed error messages when converting Rust integer types to R [[#243]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/243)
```

- `Character` is now called `Rstr` [[#273]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/273)

> - Bump `ndarray` to 0.15.3. Under [RFC 1977](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1977) this is a "public dependency" change, and therefore can be considered a breaking change, as consumers of `extendr` that use an older version of `ndarray` will no longer be compatible until they also bump `ndarray` to a compatible version. [[#275]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/275)

Reviewer: Using proposed above 'feature' syntax
```suggestion
- [**ndarray**] Bumped `ndarray` to 0.15.3. Under [RFC 1977](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1977) this is a "public dependency" change, and therefore can be considered a breaking change, as consumers of `extendr` that use an older version of `ndarray` will no longer be compatible until they also bump `ndarray` to a compatible version. [[#275]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/275)
```

- `IsNA` trait has been renamed to `CanBeNA` [[#288]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/288)
- `list!` has been rewritten, and how returns a `List` struct [[#303]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/303)

### Deprecated
- Calling the `R!` macro with non-string types (e.g. `R!(1)`) is now deprecated. [[#203]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/203)

### Removed

> - `Real`, `Int`, `Bool` and the redundant trait `SliceIter`, which should be replaced with `Doubles`, `Integers`, and `Logicals` respectively [[#304]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/304), [[#338]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/338)

Reviewer: AFAIK, `Bool` was superseded by `Rbool`. I suspect the same applies to `Real` (`Rfloat`) and `Int` (`Rint`), but I am not 100% sure.

- `r_name` option for `extendr`-annotated functions, allowing the generated R function to have a different name. e.g.
    ```rust
    #[extendr(
        use_try_from = true,
        r_name = "test.rename.rlike",
        mod_name = "test_rename_mymod"
    )]
    fn test_rename() { }
    ```
    [[#335]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/335)
- `serde::Serialize` implementation for R types. [[#305]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/305), [[#355]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/355)
- `Rany` type and the `as_any` conversion method. [[#320]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/320)
- `std::fmt::Debug` implementation for wrapper types. [[#345]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/345)
- `[[` operator that works with Rust classes. Its behavior is identical to that of the `$` operator. [[#359]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/359)
- `Load` and `Save`, traits that, once implemented, provide the ability to load and save R data in the RDS format. These traits are implemented for all `Robj`. [[#363]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/363)

> - Support for R version 4.2. [[#399]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/399)

Reviewer 2: #399 just tweaked the CI setting. I think we didn't do any notable changes to support R 4.2 (maybe we replaced some API use that was removed on R 4.2?).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Support for R version 4.2. [[#235]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/issues/235)
```

https://github.com/extendr/extendr/issues/235 seems more appropriate to refer to.

Author: I think I'll reference both, then. No reason not to.

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with either, but Is it a common practice to include changes only on the repository settings? What we publish to crates.io is Rust code and the related docs, so I thought it was out of scope of a changelog. Sorry, I just don't know well about how a Rust crate would usually do.

Author: Oh, I see your point. You're right, I'm generally trying to keep this changelog user focused. Which is a bit hard to define, but  the CI is surely out of scope.

- Large Rust integer types (`u32`, `u64` and `i64`) can now be converted to R's `numeric` type, which can handle large integer values. [[#242]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/242)
- `call!` macro, which can be used to call an R function whose name is provided as a string. [[#238]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/238)
- `TryFrom<Robj>` for a large number of Rust types. [[#249]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/249), [[#258]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/258)
- Support for `ALTREP`. [[#250]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/250)
- `S4` struct, which wraps an S4 class in R. [[#268]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/268)
- Implemented `TryFrom<&ArrayBase> for Robj`, allowing `extendr`-annotated functions to return Arrays from the `ndarray` crate and have them automatically converted to R arrays. Note: even if 1D arrays are returned they will not be returned as vectors.. [[#275]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/275)

> - `Rint`, `Rdouble`, `Rbool` and `Rcplx`: `NA`-aware wrappers classes for scalar elements of R vectors [[#274]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/274), [[#284]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/284), [[#301]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/301), [[#338]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/338), [[#350]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/350)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Rint`, `Rdouble`, `Rbool` and `Rcplx`: `NA`-aware wrapper classes for scalar elements of R vectors [[#274]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/274), [[#284]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/284), [[#301]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/301), [[#338]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/338), [[#350]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/350)
```

> - `Integers`, `Doubles`, `Strings`, `Logicals` and `Complexes`: `ALTREP` wrappers for R vectors that deref to slices of the above types (`RInt` etc). [[#274]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/274), [[#284]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/284), [[#301]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/301), [[#338]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/338), [[#350]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/350)

Reviewer: These aren't ALTREPs as afar as I remember. These are just wrappers around R vectors. They do handle altreps through the standard C/R functions. There is a separate trait for ALTREP, which pretty much allows creating generators on R side by marshaling some state data and a generating function to the R side.
```suggestion
- `Integers`, `Doubles`, `Strings`, `Logicals` and `Complexes`: wrappers for R vectors (both regular and `ALTREP`) that deref to slices of the above types (`Rint` etc). [[#274]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/274), [[#284]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/284), [[#301]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/301), [[#338]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/338), [[#350]](https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/350)
```

Reviewer: ``` r
rextendr::rust_function(
    "fn deref_altrep(x : Integers, i : i32) -> extendr_api::scalar::Rint { (*x)[i as usize] }",
    patch.crates_io = list(`extendr-api` = list(git = "https://github.com/extendr/extendr"))
)
#> ℹ build directory: 'C:/Users/<...>/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpyQgE7x/filec1bc5bb465c8'
#> ✔ Writing 'C:/Users/<...>/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpyQgE7x/filec1bc5bb465c8/target/extendr_wrappers.R'

x <- 1L:1e7L
x |> lobstr::sxp() |> print()
#> [1:0x1fa53ee7250] <INTSXP[1e+07]> (altrep named:65535)

testthat::expect_equal(
    deref_altrep(x, 50L),
    51L
)
```

<sup>Created on 2022-05-29 by the [reprex package](https://reprex.tidyverse.org) (v2.0.1)</sup>

Author: What does this tell us?

Reviewer: I am sorry I did not explain enough what I tried to check. Our PRs are a bit... mixed up, sometimes we push in several features in one PR. PRs you mention in this bullet point are all related to vector wrappers and their respective scalar types, which *are not exclusively ALTREP*. However, this PR https://github.com/extendr/extendr/pull/274 introduces not only `Rint`, but also mechanisms to produce custom ALTREP vectors, i.e. a way to convert rust data structure and rust function into an altrep class that R understands. I'd suggest to move this PR (or mention it again) at the `ALTREP` introduction bullet.

Here I suggest to write that theses types (`Integers` and friends) are wrappers for *all* R vectors, both regular and altrep. Otherwise it may seem that `Integers` are solely for `ALTREP`, which is not the case.
My example showed that one can pass an altrep integer vector to rust using `Integers` as wrapper type and perform deref to get one of the elements.

Here is the same function working identically with both altrep and non-altrep vectors 
``` r
rextendr::rust_source(
    code = "
    use extendr_api::prelude::*;
    #[extendr]
    fn deref_altrep(x : Integers, i : i32) -> Rint {
        (*x)[i as usize] 
    }
    ",
    patch.crates_io = list(`extendr-api` = list(git = "https://github.com/extendr/extendr"))
)
#> ℹ build directory: 'C:/Users/<...>/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpOUbDTy/file86b87a9d7b76'
#> ✔ Writing 'C:/Users/<...>/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpOUbDTy/file86b87a9d7b76/target/extendr_wrappers.R'

x <- 1L:1e7L
x |> lobstr::sxp() |> print()
#> [1:0x1c1f6d2feb0] <INTSXP[1e+07]> (altrep named:65535)

testthat::expect_equal(
    deref_altrep(x, 50L),
    51L
)
y <- c(1L, 2L, 3L, 4L, 5L, 6L, 7L)
y |> lobstr::sxp() |> print()
#> [1:0x1c1f6243a08] <INTSXP[7]> (named:4)

testthat::expect_equal(
    deref_altrep(y, 5L),
    6L
)
```

<sup>Created on 2022-05-29 by the [reprex package](https://reprex.tidyverse.org) (v2.0.1)</sup>

Author: Okay I've removed the altrep reference. I'm happy to reference the same PR multiple times, so I've put it under *both* altrep and under the vector type feature.
